In this video, we will learn about another visualization tool: the pie chart,
and we will learn how to create it using Matplotlib.
So what is a pie chart? A pie chart is a circular statistical graphic divided
into slices to illustrate numerical proportion. For example, here is a pie
chart of the Canadian federal election back in 2015 were the Liberals in red
won more than 50% of the seats in the House of Commons. That is why the red
color occupies more than half of the circle. So how do we create a pie chart
with Matplotlib? Before we go over the code to do that, let's do a quick recap
of our dataset. Recall that each row represents a country and contains
metadata about the country such as where it is located geographically and whether
it is developing or developed. Each row also contains numerical figures of
annual immigration from that country to Canada from 1980 to 2013.
Now let's process the dataframe so that the country name becomes the index of
each row. This should make retrieving rows pertaining to specific countries a
lot easier. Also let's add an extra column which represents the cumulative
sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980 to 2013. So for
Afghanistan for example, it is 58,639, total, and for Albania, it is
15,699 and so on. And let's name our dataframe df_canada. So now
that we know how our data is stored in the dataframe df_canada, say
we're interested in visualizing a breakdown of immigration to Canada
continent wise. The first step is to group our data by
continent using the continent column and we use pandas for this. We call the
pandas groupby function on df_canada and we sum the number
of immigrants from the countries that belong to the
same continent. Here is the resulting dataframe, and let's name it
df_continents. The resulting dataframe has six rows, each
representing a continent and 35 columns representing the years from 1980 to 2013
plus the cumulative sum of immigration for each continent. And now we're ready
to start creating our pie chart. We start with the usual, importing Matplotlib as
mpl and its scripting layer the pyplot interface as plt. Then we call the
plot function on column total of the dataframe df_continents and
we set kind equals pie to generate a pie chart. Then to complete the figure we
give it a title. Finally we call the show function to
display the figure. And there you have it. A pie chart that depicts each continent's
proportion of immigration to Canada from 1980 to 2013. In the lab session, we will
go through the process of creating a very professional-looking and
aesthetically pleasing pie chart and transform the pie chart that we just
created into one that looks like this. So make sure to complete this module's lab
session. One last comment on pie charts. There are some very vocal opponents to
the use of pie charts under any circumstances. Most argue that pie charts
fail to accurately display data with any consistency. Bar charts are much
better when it comes to representing the data in a consistent way and getting the
message across. If you're interested in learning more about the arguments
against pie charts, here is a link to a very interesting article that discusses
very clearly the flaws of pie charts. You can also find the link under the video.
And with this we conclude our video on pie charts. I'll see you in the next
video.