In this video, we will learn about another visualization tool: the area plot,
which is actually an extension of the line plot that we learned about in an
earlier video. So what is an area plot? An area plot also known as an area chart or
graph is a type of plot that depicts accumulated totals using numbers or
percentages over time. It is based on the line plot and is commonly used when
trying to compare two or more quantities. So how can we generate an area plot with
Matplotlib? Before we go over the code to do that, let's do a quick recap of our
dataset. Recall that each row represents a country and contains metadata about
the country such as where it is located geographically and whether it is
developing or developed. Each row also contains numerical figures of annual
immigration from that country to Canada from 1980 to 2013.
Now let's process the dataframe so that the country name becomes the index of
each row. This should make retrieving rows pertaining to specific countries a
lot easier. Also, let's add an extra column which represents the cumulative
sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980 to 2013. So for
Afghanistan, it is 58,639, total, and for Albania, it is 15,699 and so
on, and let's name our data frame df_canada. So now that we know
how our data is stored in the dataframe, df_canada, let's try to
generate area plots for the countries with the highest number of immigration
to Canada. We can try to find these countries by sorting our dataframe in
descending order of cumulative total immigration from 1980 to 2013. We use the
sort_values function to sort our dataframe in descending order and
here is the result. So it turns out that India followed by China then the UK, Philippines,
and Pakistan are the top five countries with the highest number of
immigration to Canada. So can we now go ahead and generate the area plots using
the first five rows of this dataframe? Not quite yet. First we need to create a
new dataframe of only these five countries and we need to exclude the
total column. More importantly, to generate the area plots for these
countries, we need the years to be plotted on the horizontal axis and the
annual immigration to be plotted on the vertical axis.
Note that Matplotlib plots the indices of a dataframe on the horizontal axis,
and with the dataframe as shown, the countries will be plotted on the
horizontal axis. So to fix this, we need to take the transpose of the dataframe.
Let's see how we can do this. After we sort our dataframe in descending order
of cumulative annual immigration, we create a new dataframe of the top five
countries and let's call it df_top5. We then select only
the columns representing the years 1980 to 2013 in order to exclude the total
column before applying the transpose method. The resulting dataframe is
exactly what we want, with five columns where each column represents one of the
top five countries and the years being the indices. Now we can go ahead and call
the plot function on dataframe df_top5 to generate the area
plots. To do that, first we import Matplotlib as mpl and its
scripting interface as plt. Then we call the plot function on the dataframe df_top5
and we set kind equals area to generate an area plot.
Then to complete the figure we give it a title and we label its axes. Finally we
call the show function to display the figure. Note that here we're generating
the area plot using the inline backend. And there you have it: an area plot that
depicts the immigration trend of the five countries with
the highest immigration to Canada from 1980 to 2013. In the lab session, we
explore area plots in more details, so make sure to complete this module's lab
session. And with this, we conclude our video on area plots. I'll see you in the
next video.