In this video, we will learn about a very interesting data visualization library
in Python which is Folium. Folium is a powerful data visualization library in
Python that was built primarily to help people visualize geospatial data. With
Folium, you can create a map of any location in the world as long as you
know its latitude and longitude values. You can also create a map and
superimpose markers as well as clusters of markers on top of the map for cool
and very interesting visualizations. You can also create maps of different styles
such as street level map, stamen map and, a couple others which we will look
into in just a moment. Creating a world map with Folium is pretty
straightforward. You simply call the map function and that is all. What is really
interesting about the maps created by Folium is that they are interactive, so
you can zoom in and out after the map is rendered, which is a super useful feature.
The default map style is the open street map, which shows a street view of an area
when you're zoomed in and shows the borders of the world countries when
you're zoomed all the way out. Now let's create a world map centred around
Canada. To do that, we pass in the latitude and the longitude values of
Canada using the location parameter and with Folium you can set the initial zoom
level using the zoom start parameter. Now I say initial because you can easily
change the zoom level after the map is rendered by zooming in or zooming out.
You can play with this parameter to figure out what the initial zoom level
looks like for different values. Now, let's set the zoom level for our map of
Canada to 4. And there you go. Here is a world map centred around Canada.
Another amazing feature of Folium is that you can create different map styles
using the tiles parameter. Let's create a stamen toner map of Canada. This
style is great for visualizing and exploring river meanders
and coastal zones. Another style is stamen terrain. Let's create a map of
Canada in stamen terrain. This style is great for visualizing hill shading and
natural vegetation colors. And with this we conclude our introduction to Folium.
I'll see you in the next video.