In this video, we will learn more about the dataset that we will be using
throughout the course. The population division of the United Nations compiled
immigration data pertaining to 45 countries. The data consist of the total
number of immigrants from all over the world to each of the 45 countries as
well as other metadata pertaining to the immigrants countries of origin. In this
course, we will focus on immigration to Canada and we will work primarily with
the data set involving immigration to the great white north Here is a snapshot
of the UN data on immigration to Canada in the form of an excel file. As you can
see, the first twenty rows contain textual data about the UN Department and other
irrelevant information. Row 21 contains the labels of the columns. Following that
each row represents a country and contains metadata about the country such
as what continent it resides in, what region it belongs to, and whether the
region is developing or developed. Each row also contains the total number of
immigrants from that country for the years 1980 all the way to 2013.
Throughout this course, we will be using pandas for any analysis of the data
before creating any visualizations. So in order to start creating different types
of plots of the data whether for exploratory analysis or for presentation,
we will need to import the data into a pandas dataframe. To do that, we will
need to import the pandas library as well as the xlrd library, which is
required to extract data from Excel spreadsheet files. Then we call the
pandas function read_excel to read the data into a pandas dataframe.
And let's name this dataframe df_can. Notice how we're skipping
the first twenty rows to read only the data  corresponding to each country. If you
want to confirm that you have imported your data correctly, in pandas, you can
always use the head function to display the first five rows of the dataframe. So,
if we call this function on our dataframe, df_can, here is the
output. As you can see, the output of the head function looks correct with the
columns having the correct labels and each row representing a country and
containing the total number of immigrants from that country. This
concludes our video on the immigration to Canada dataset. I will see you in the
next video.