In this video, we will learn about an additional visualization tool: the
scatter plot, and we will learn how to create it using Matplotlib. So what is a
scatter plot? A scatter plot is a type of plot that displays values pertaining to
typically two variables against each other. Usually it is a dependent variable
to be plotted against an independent variable in order to determine if any
correlation between the two variables exists. For example, here is a scatter
plot of income versus education and by looking at the plotted data one can
conclude that an individual with more years of education is likely to earn a
higher income than an individual with fewer years of education. So how can we
create a scatterplot with Matplotlib? Before we go over the code to do that,
let's do a quick recap of our dataset. Recall that each row represents a
country and contains metadata about the country such as where it is located
geographically and whether it is developing or developed. Each row also
contains numerical figures of annual immigration from that country to Canada
from 1980 to 2013.
Now let's process the dataframe so that the country name becomes the index of
each row. This should make retrieving rows pertaining to specific countries a
lot easier. Also let's add an extra column which represents the cumulative
sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980 to 2013. So for
Afghanistan for example, it is 58,639, total, and for Albania it is
15,699 and so on. And let's name our dataframe df_canada. So now
that we know how our data is stored in the dataframe, df_canada, say
were interested in plotting a scatter plot of the total annual immigration to
Canada from 1980 to 2013. To be able to do that,
we first need to create a new dataframe that shows each year and the
corresponding total number of immigration from all the countries worldwide as
shown here. Let's name this new dataframe, df_total. In the lab
session, we will walk together through the process of creating df_total
from df_canada, so make sure to complete this module's lab
session. Then we proceed as usual. We import Matplotlib as mpl and its
scripting layer, the pyplot interface, as plt. Then we call the plot function on
the data frame df_total and we set kind equals scatter to generate a
scatter plot. Now unlike the other data visualization
tools were only passing the kind parameter was enough to generate the
plot, with scatter plots we also need to pass the variable to be plotted on the
horizontal axis as the x-parameter and the variable to be plotted on the
vertical axis as the y-parameter. In this case, we're passing column year as the
x-parameter and column total as the y-parameter. Then to complete the figure we
give it a title and we label its axes. Finally, we call the show function to
display the figure. And there you have it. A scatter plot that shows total
immigration to Canada from countries all over the world from 1980 to 2013. The
scatter plot clearly depicts an overall rising trend of immigration with time. In
the lab session we explore scatter plots in more details and learn about a very
interesting variation of this scatter plot, a plot called the bubble plot, and
we learn how to create it using Matplotlib. So make sure to complete this
module's lab session. And with this, we conclude our video on scatter plots. I'll
see you in the next video.