In this video, we will learn about an additional visualization tool, namely the
bar chart, and learn how to create it using Matplotlib. A bar chart is a very
popular visualization tool. Unlike a histogram, a bar chart also known as a
bar graph is a type of plot where the length of each bar is proportional to
the value of the item that it represents. It is commonly used to compare the
values of a variable at a given point in time. For example, say we're interested in
visualizing in a discrete fashion how immigration from Iceland to Canada
looked like from 1980 to 2013. One way to do that is by building a bar chart where
the height of the bar represents the total immigration from Iceland to Canada
in a particular year. So how do we do that with Matplotlib. Before we go over
the code to do that, let's do a quick recap of our dataset. Recall that each
row represents a country and contains metadata about the country such as where
it is located geographically and whether it is developing or developed. Each row
also contains numerical figures of annual immigration from that country to
Canada from 1980 to 2013.
Now let's process the dataframe so that the country name becomes the index of
each row. This should make retrieving rows pertaining to specific countries a
lot easier. Also let's add an extra column which represents the cumulative
sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980 to 2013.
So for Afghanistan for example, it is 58,639, total, and for Albania it is
15,699 and so on. And let's name our dataframe, df_canada. So now
that we know how our data is stored in the dataframe, df_canada,
let's see how we can use Matplotlib to generate a bar chart to visualize how
immigration from Iceland to Canada looked like from
1980 to 2013. As usual, we start by importing Matplotlib and its scripting interface.
Then we use the years variable to create a new dataframe; let's name it
df_iceland, which includes the data pertaining to annual immigration
from Iceland to Canada and excluding the total column. Then we call the plot
function on df_iceland and we set kind equals bar to generate a bar
chart. Then to complete the figure we give it a title and we label its axes.
Finally, we call the show function to display the figure. And there you have it.
A bar chart that depicts the immigration from Iceland to Canada from 1980 to 2013.
By examining the bar chart we notice that immigration to Canada from Iceland
has seen an increasing trend since 2010. I'm sure that the curious among you are
already wondering who the culprit behind this increasing trend is. In the lab
session, we reveal the reason and we also learn how to create a bar chart
with horizontal bars, so make sure to complete this module's lab session. And
with this, we conclude our video on bar charts. I'll see you in the next video.